@Keywords:
OIL, SPILL, TANKER, VALDEZ, SATURDAY, oil that spilled, Coast Guard, SHIP, GALLON, Exxon Valdez

@Digest:
Millions of gallons of crude oil that spilled when a tanker ran aground spread across a wildlife-rich stretch of ocean Saturday, and Alaska's chief environmental officer criticized cleanup efforts as too slow.
Some 240,000 barrels _ about 10,080,000 gallons _ of crude oil from Alaska's North Slope spilled early Friday when the 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez ran hard aground on Bligh Reef, about 25 miles outside Valdez, where it had taken on a total cargo of 1.2 million barrels.
``What we have here is a major environmental catastrophe,'' said one oil spill expert, Richard Golob of Boston, publisher of Golob Oil Pollution Bulletin.
Divers Saturday said they had found six to eight holes in the vessel's hull large enough to swim through, said Frank Iarossi, president of Exxon Shipping Co.
Efforts to begin pumping 200,000 gallons of oil off the Exxon Valdez onto another tanker, the Exxon Baton Rouge, were halted early Saturday when authorities noticed that oil appeared to leaking as the pumping operation proceeded.
``If it's not  you endanger the stability of the vessel.'' Wieliczkiewicz said a boom was placed around the Exxon Valdez and the Exxon Baton Rouge to help contain oil around the vessels.
He also said four members of the Coast Guard's Pacific Strike Team from San Francisco, specially trained to deal with pollution and oil spills, arrived Saturday and were helping to rig pumps and assemble equipment needed to transfer oil to the Baton Rouge.
The Port of Valdez remained closed to tanker traffic.
The Coast Guard said the Exxon Valdez struck the reef when it maneuvered outside normal tanker traffic lanes to avoid icebergs.
There was no decision Saturday on whether to use chemicals to disperse the oil, but a test of the dispersal method was being conducted Saturday afternoon, as was a test to determine whether at least some of the crude oil could be burned.
The Coast Guard issued a statement late Saturday that McCall has subpoenaed the ship's master and two crew members.
The Coast Guard said the supoenas were routine.
Previously, the largest U.S. tanker spill was the Dec.
However, that oil burned as well as spilled.

